YDBDOCS-119: revamp the glossary page (#5537)
ydb-platform/ydb: ydb/docs/en/core/concepts/glossary.md

#### Database node {#database-node}

**Database nodes** (also known as **tenant nodes**) serve user queries addressed to a specific logical [database](#database). Their state is only in memory and can be recovered from the [Distributed Storage](#distributed-storage). All database nodes of a given [{{ ydb-short-name }} cluster](cluster/index.md) can be considered its compute layer. Thus, adding database nodes and allocating extra CPU and RAM to them are the main ways to increase the database's compute resources.

The main role of database nodes is to run various [tablets](#tablet) and [actors](#actor), as well as accept incoming requests via various endpoints.

#### Storage node {#storage-node}

**Storage nodes** are stateful and responsible for long-term persisting pieces of data. All storage nodes of a given [{{ ydb-short-name }} cluster](#cluster) are called [Distributed Storage](#distributed-storage) and can be considered the cluster's storage layer. Thus, adding extra storage nodes and their disks are the main ways to increase the cluster's storage capacity and input/output throughput.

#### Hybrid node {#hybrid-mode}

> A **hybrid node** is a process that simultaneously serves both roles of a [database](#database-node) and [storage](#storage-node) node. They are rarely used in production environments.

Author: ```suggestion
A **hybrid node** is a process that simultaneously serves both roles of a [database](#database-node) and [storage](#storage-node) node. Hybrid nodes are often used for development purposes. For instance, you can run a container with a full-featured {{ ydb-short-name }} containing only one process, `ydbd`, in hybrid mode. They are rarely used in production environments.
```

A **static group** is a special [storage group](#storage-group) created during the initial cluster deployment. Its primary role is to store system [tablet's](#tablet) data, which can be considered cluster-wide metadata.

A static group might require special attention during major maintenance, such as decommissioning an [availability zone](#regions-az).

#### Dynamic group {#dynamic-group}

Regular storage groups that are not [static](#static-group) are called **dynamic groups**. They are called dynamic because they can be created and decommissioned on the fly during [cluster](#cluster) operation.

### Actor {#actor}

The [actor model](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Actor_model) is one of the main approaches for concurrent programming, which is employed by {{ ydb-short-name }}. In this model, **actors** are lightweight user-space processes that may have and modify their private state but can only affect each other indirectly through message passing. {{ ydb-short-name }} has its own implementation of this model, which is covered [below](#actor-implementation).

In {{ ydb-short-name }}, actors with the reliably persisted state are called [tablets](#tablet).

### Tablet {#tablet}

> A **tablet** is one of {{ ydb-short-name }}'s primary building blocks and abstractions. It is an entity responsible for a relatively small (up to single-digit gigabytes) segment of user or system data. For example, a row-oriented user table is managed by one or more tablets, with each tablet responsible for a continuous range of [primary keys](#primary-key) and the corresponding data.

Author: ```suggestion
A **tablet** is one of {{ ydb-short-name }}'s primary building blocks and abstractions. It is an entity responsible for a relatively small segment of user or system data. Typically, a tablet manages up to single-digit gigabytes of data, but some kinds of tablets can handle more.

For example, a [row-oriented user table](#row-oriented-table) is managed by one or more [DataShard](#datashard) tablets, with each tablet responsible for a continuous range of [primary keys](#primary-key) and the corresponding data.
```

{{ ydb-short-name }} implements **transactions** on two main levels:

* [Local database](#local-database) and the rest of [tablet infrastructure](#tablet-implementation) allow [tablets](#tablet) to manipulate their state using **local transactions** with [serializable isolation level](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Isolation_%28database_systems%29#Serializable). Technically, they aren't really local to a single node as such a state persists remotely in [Distributed Storage](#distributed-storage).
* In the context of {{ ydb-short-name }}, the term **distributed transactions** usually refers to transactions involving multiple tablets. For example, cross-table or even cross-row transactions are often distributed.

Together, these mechanisms allow {{ ydb-short-name }} to provide [strict consistency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Consistency_model#Strict_consistency).

The implementation of distributed transactions is covered in a separate article [{#T}](../contributor/datashard-distributed-txs.md), while below there's a list of several [related terms](#distributed-transactions-implementation).

### Multi-version concurrency control {#mvcc}

> **Multi-version concurrency control** or **MVCC** is a method {{ ydb-short-name }} used to allow multiple concurrent transactions to access the database simultaneously without interfering with each other. It is described in more detail in a separate article [{#T}](mvcc.md).

Author: ```suggestion
[**Multi-version concurrency control**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multiversion_concurrency_control) or **MVCC** is a method {{ ydb-short-name }} used to allow multiple concurrent transactions to access the database simultaneously without interfering with each other. It is described in more detail in a separate article [{#T}](mvcc.md).
```

#### Primary key {#primary-key}

A **primary key** is an ordered list of columns, the values of which uniquely identify rows. It is used to build the [table's primary index](#primary-index). It is provided by the {{ ydb-short-name }} user during [table creation](../yql/reference/syntax/create_table.md) and dramatically impacts the performance of workloads interacting with that table.

The guidelines on choosing primary keys are provided in [{#T}](../dev/primary-key/index.md).

#### Primary index {#primary-index}

A **primary index** or **primary key index** is the main data structure used to locate rows in a table. It is built based on the chosen [primary key](#primary-key) and determines the physical order of rows in a table; thus, each table can have only one primary index. The primary index is unique.

#### Secondary index {#secondary-index}

> A **secondary index** is an additional data structure used to locate rows in a table, typically when it can't be done efficiently using the [primary index](#primary-index). Unlike the primary index, secondary indexes are managed independently from the main table data. Thus, a table might have multiple secondary indexes for different use cases. {{ ydb-short-name }}'s capabilities in terms of secondary indexes are covered in a separate article [{#T}](secondary_indexes.md). Secondary indexes can be either unique or non-unique.

Author: Let's add them separately as part of the next iteration of OLAP docs.

#### Consumer {#consumer}

A **consumer** is an entity that reads messages from a topic.

### Change data capture {#cdc}

**Change data capture** or **CDC** is a mechanism that allows subscribing to a stream of changes to a given [table](#table). Technically, it is implemented on top of [topics](#topic). It is described in more detail in a separate article [{#T}](cdc.md).

### YQL {#yql}

**YQL ({{ ydb-short-name }} Query Language)** is a high-level language for working with the system. It is a dialect of [ANSI SQL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SQL). There's a lot of content covering YQL, including a [tutorial](../dev/yql-tutorial/index.md), [reference](../yql/reference/syntax/index.md), and [recipes](../recipes/yql/index.md).

### Federated queries {#federated-queries}

**Federated queries** is a feature that allows querying data stored in systems external to the {{ ydb-short-name }} cluster.

A few terms related to federated queries are listed below. How {{ ydb-short-name }} federated queries work is explained in more detail in a separate article [{#T}](federated_query/index.md).

#### External data source {#external-data-source}

> An **external data source** or **external connection** is a piece of metadata that describes how to connect to a supported external system for federated query execution.

Reviewer: "federated query" has to be a link to federated query

Author: ```suggestion
An **external data source** or **external connection** is a piece of metadata that describes how to connect to a supported external system for [federated query execution](#federated-queries).
```

#### External table {#external-table}

An **external table** is a piece of metadata that describes a particular dataset that can be retrieved from an [external data source](#external-data-source).

#### Secret {#secret}

> A **secret** is a sensitive piece of metadata that requires special handling. Typically, secrets are used in [external data source](#external-data-source) definitions and represent things like passwords and tokens.

Reviewer: Also secrets can be used for
* async replication
* data offloading to S3

Author: ```suggestion
A **secret** is a sensitive piece of metadata that requires special handling. For example, secrets can be used in [external data source](#external-data-source) definitions and represent things like passwords and tokens.
```
As far as I know, both of these features are not documented yet. So for now, I've just changed: typically -> for example.

  
MiniKQL is a low-level language. The system's end users only see queries in the [YQL](#yql) language, which relies on MiniKQL in its implementation.

#### KQP {#kqp}

**KQP** is a {{ ydb-short-name }} component responsible for the orchestration of user query execution and generating the final response.

### Global schema {#global-schema}

**Global Schema**, **Global Scheme**, or **Database Schema** is a schema of all the data stored in a [database](#database). It consists of [tables](#table) and other entities, such as [topics](#topic). The metadata about these entities is called a global schema. The term is used in contrast to **Local Schema**, which refers to the data schema inside a [tablet](#tablet). {{ ydb-short-name }} users never see the local schema and only work with the global schema.

### KiKiMR {#kikimr}

> **KiKiMR** is the legacy name of {{ ydb-short-name }} that was used before it became an [open-source product](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb). It can still be occasionally found in the source code, old articles and videos, etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**KiKiMR** is the legacy name of {{ ydb-short-name }} that was used long before it became an [open-source product](https://github.com/ydb-platform/ydb). It can still be occasionally found in the source code, old articles and videos, etc.
```

#### Yard {#yard}

**Yard** is the name of the [PDisk](#pdisk) API. It allows [VDisk](#vdisk) to read and write data to chunks and logs, reserve chunks, delete chunks, and transactionally receive and return ownership of chunks. In some contexts, Yard can be considered to be a synonym for PDisk.

#### Skeleton {#skeleton}

A **Skeleton** is an actor that provides an interface to a [VDisk](#vdisk).

#### SkeletonFront {#skeletonfront}

**SkeletonFront** is a proxy actor for Skeleton that controls the flow of messages coming to Skeleton.

> #### Controller {#ds-controller}

Reviewer: Я бы не писал просто Controller в названии. Надо "Distributed Storage Controller" или "DS Controller"

Author: ```suggestion
#### Distributed storage controller {#ds-controller}
```

#### Fail realm {#fail-realm}

A [storage group](#storage-group) is a set of [VDisks](#vdisk) combined into one or more **Fail realms**. A Fail realm contains one or more [Fail domains](#fail-domain). The correlated failure of two VDisks within the same Fail realm is more likely than that of two VDisks from different Fail realms. A Fail realm usually corresponds to the physical concept of a data center or Availability Zone (AZ).

#### Fail domain {#fail-domain}

A [Fail realm](#fail-realm) contains one or more **Fail domains**. The correlated failure of two [VDisks](#vdisk) within the same Fail domain is more likely than that of two VDisks from different Fail domains. A Fail domain usually corresponds to a [server rack](#rack) concept.

> #### Channel {#channel}

Reviewer: Distributed Storage Channel или DS Channel

Author: ```suggestion
#### Distributed storage channel {#channel}
```

> A **channel** is a logical connection between a [tablet](#tablet) and [Distributed storage](#distributed-storage). The tablet can write data to different channels, and each channel is mapped to a specific [storage group](#storage-group). Having multiple channels allows the tablet to:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **channel** is a logical connection between a [tablet](#tablet) and [Distributed storage](#distributed-storage) group. The tablet can write data to different channels, and each channel is mapped to a specific [storage group](#storage-group). Having multiple channels allows the tablet to:
```

### Distributed transactions implementation {#distributed-transaction-implementation}

Terms related to the implementation of [distributed transactions](#distributed-transactions) are explained below. The implementation itself is described in a separate article [{#T}](../contributor/datashard-distributed-txs.md).

#### Deterministic transactions {#deterministic-transactions}

{{ ydb-short-name }} distributed transactions are inspired by the research paper [Building Deterministic Transaction Processing Systems without Deterministic Thread Scheduling](http://cs-www.cs.yale.edu/homes/dna/papers/transactions-wodet11.pdf) by Alexander Thomson and Daniel J. Abadi from Yale University. The paper introduced the concept of **deterministic transaction** processing, which allows for highly efficient distributed processing of transactions. The original paper imposed limitations on what kinds of operations can be executed in this manner. As these limitations interfered with real-world user scenarios, {{ ydb-short-name }} evolved its algorithms to overcome them by using deterministic transactions as stages of executing user transactions with additional orchestration and locking.

> #### Optimistic locking {#optimistic-locking}

Reviewer: pls, add a ref to https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Optimistic_concurrency_control

As in many other database management systems, {{ ydb-short-name }} queries can put locks on certain pieces of data, like table rows, to ensure that concurrent access does not modify them into an inconsistent state. However, {{ ydb-short-name }} checks these locks not at the beginning of transactions but during commit attempts. The former is called **pessimistic locking** (used in PostgreSQL, for example), while the latter is called **optimistic locking** (used in {{ ydb-short-name }}).

#### Prepare stage {#prepare-stage}

> The **prepare stage** is the transaction phase, during which the transaction body is registered on all participating shards.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **prepare stage** is a phase of distributed transaction execution, during which the transaction body is registered on all participating shards.
```

#### Execute stage {#execute-stage}

> The **execute stage** is the transaction phase in which the scheduled transaction is executed and the response is generated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **execute stage** is a phase of distributed query execution in which the scheduled transaction is executed and the response is generated.
```

In some cases, instead of [prepare](#prepare-stage) and execute, the transaction is immediately executed, and a response is generated.  For example, this happens for transactions involving only one shard or consistent reads from a snapshot.

#### Dirty operations {#dirty-operations}

In the case of read-only transactions, similar to "read uncommitted" in other database management systems, it might be necessary to read data that has not yet been committed to disk. This is called **dirty operations**.

#### Read-write set {#rw-set}

> The **read-write set** or **RW set** is a set of shards that will participate in executing a [distributed transaction](#distributed-transactions). It combines read-set shards, from which data will be read, and write-set shards, in which modifications will be carried out.

Reviewer: Эээ! В моем понимании, RW set -- это набор данных, а не набор шардов... Конечно, всегда есть соответсвие между этими данными и шардами... Но как-то оно на мой взгляд прямо неправильно написано

Author: ```suggestion
The **read-write set** or **RW set** is a set of data that will participate in executing a [distributed transaction](#distributed-transactions). It combines the read set, the data that will be read, and the write set, the data modifications to be carried out.
```

#### Read set {#read-set}

> The **read set** or **ReadSet data** is what participating shards forward during the transaction execution. In the case of data transactions, it may contain information about the state of [optimistic locks](#optimistic-locking), the readiness of the shard for commit, or the decision to cancel the transaction.

Reviewer: И вот здесь правильно написано

#### Transaction proxy {#transaction-proxy}

The **transaction proxy** or `TX_PROXY` is a service that orchestrates the execution of many [distributed transactions](#distributed-transactions): sequential phases, phase execution, planning, and aggregation of results. In the case of direct orchestration by other actors (for example, KQP data transactions), it is used for caching and allocation of unique [TxIDs](#txid).

#### Transaction flags {#txflags}

**Transaction flags** or **TxFlags** is a bitmask of flags that modify the execution of a transaction in some way.

#### Transaction ID {#txid}

**Transaction ID** or **TxID** is a unique identifier assigned to each transaction when it is accepted by {{ ydb-short-name }}.

#### Transaction order ID {#transaction-order-id}

> A **transaction order ID** is a unique identifier assigned to each transaction during planning.

Reviewer: И дополнительно. Transaction order ID состоит из Transaction ID + PlanStep. 
Я бы уточнил у snaury и поправил

Author: ```suggestion
A **transaction order ID** is a unique identifier assigned to each transaction during planning. It consists of [Transaction ID](#txid) and [PlanStep](#step).
```

> A **transaction order ID** is a unique identifier assigned to each transaction during planning. It consists of [Transaction ID](#txid) and [PlanStep](#planstep).

Author: ```suggestion
A **transaction order ID** is a unique identifier assigned to each transaction during planning. It consists of [PlanStep](#planstep) and [Transaction ID](#txid).
```

#### PlanStep {#planstep}

**PlanStep** or **step** is the logical time for which a set of transactions is planned to be executed.

#### Mediator time {#mediator-time}

> **Mediator time** is the logical time before which (inclusive) the shard participant must know the entire execution plan. It is used to advance the time in the absence of transactions on a particular shard to determine whether it can read from a snapshot.

Reviewer: надо написать, что это относится к механизму distr query execution

Author: ```suggestion
During the distributed query execution, **mediator time** is the logical time before which (inclusive) the shard participant must know the entire execution plan. It is used to advance the time in the absence of transactions on a particular shard, to determine whether it can read from a snapshot.
```
